Cfi
Swimming Pool Chemistry
Those who own or maintain swimming
pools know that frequent checks
should be made on the water quality.
One kind of pool "housekeeping" involves the removal of suspended particles such as leaves, dirt, and hair using skimmers and filters. A second
kind deals with the much less visible
buildup in the water of dissolved pollutants. Dissolved pollutants such as
body wastes, algae, and disease-causing bacteriarequire chemical
treatment.
Removing Bacteria
The chemical treatment of swimming
pools involves the active disinfectant
hypochlorous acid, HOCI. HOCI, a
substance also used in drinking water
purification and the final step of wastewater treatment, can be produced by
the reaction of chlorine gas, C12, with
water:
CI2 (g) + H20 (1)- HOCI (aq) + H+
(aq) + CI- (aq)
Because of the corrosive and toxic
properties of chlorine gas, sophisticated equipment is needed to' handle
it. This makes it impractical for home
swimming pool use. Therefore,
chlorine-containing compounds that
serve as a source of HOCI are used instead. Sodium hypochlorite, NaOCI,
the active ingredient in household
bleach, is a commonly used disinfectant because it reacts with water to
produce HOCI:
NaOCI (aq) + H20-HOCI (aq) +
Na+ (aq) + OH- (aq)
Other examples of pool sanitizers are
calcium hypochlorite, Ca(OClb which
is marketed as HTH® and chlorinated
isocyanurates, such as trichloroisocyanuric acid.
Ca(OCI)2 + 2 H20-
2 HOCI + Ca(OHh
HOCI is a small molecule that is
deadly to bacteria. Because of its size
4
CI
I
O=C....N......C=O HO-C~::;N.....C-O
C I I C + 3H20 ......3HOCI + I II
I-N......C,..N- I N~C/N
II I
o OH
Trichloroisocyanuric acid Cyanuric acid
and lack of charge, it can easily penetrate the cell wall of a bacterium. Once
it is inside, both the chlorine and the
oxygen from the hypochlorous acid
molecule oxidize or "burn out" the interior of the bacterium by breaking
down the bacterium's protein.
Maintaining Chemical Balance
The amount of HOCI available in a
swimming pool depends on several
factors. Immediately after treatment,
there is plenty of HOCI in a pool. The
level of HOCI decreases as it is used
in destroying bacteria, algae, and
other organic substances in the pool.
Also, the amount of HOCI present in
the water depends on the pH of the
water in the pool.
To see how changes in pH affect the
amount of HOCI available, we must
understand that HOCI dissociates
(breaks apart) to form hydrogen ion,
H+, and hypochlorite ion, OCI-, in
water:
HOCI (aq) - H+ (aq) + OCI- (aq)
(1 )
H+ and OCI- can also recombine to
produce HOCI molecules:
H+ (aq) + OCI- (aq) - HOCI (aq) (2)
Because reaction 2 is just the reverse
of reaction 1, and because both reactions are occurring at the same time,
chemists usually write one equation to
represent both processes.
HOCI (aq) I I H+ (aq) + OCI-
(Hypochlorous (Hydrogen (Hypochlorite
acid) ion) ion)
When these two reactions occur at the
same rate, we say that an equilibrium
exists.
When the pH of the water in the
pool .is lowered, that is when more H+
is added to the system, the extra H+
reacts with some of the OCI- already
present to produce more HOCI. The
concentration of HOCI available in the
pool is increased and we say "the
equilibrium is shifted to the left." If the
pH is raised by adding a base, the extra hydroxide ion, OH-, combines with
some of the H+ in the pool to produce
water:
H+ (aq) + OH- (aq) - H20 (I)
Some of the available HOCI in the
pool then breaks apart to form more
H+ (to compensate for the H+ that
was used up by the OH-) and more
Using the relative sizes of the symbols
to show concentration, we can show
the equilibrium at a pH of 7.5 as:
If the pH drops below 7.5, the equilibrium shifts to the left because of the increase in H + concentration:
+
HOCI=H+OClIf the pH rises, the equilibrium shifts to
the right to try to replace the H + consumed by base:
HOCl~ H'+ OCIFigure 1
Effects of pH changes
%of %of
chlorine chlorine
pH as OCI- as HOCI
6.0 3.5 96.5
6,5 10.0 90.0
7.0 27.5 72.5
7.5 50.0 50.0
8.0 78.5 21.5
8.5 90.0 10.0
OCI-. We say that the "equilibrium is
shifted to the right."
Figure 1 shows how shifts in pH
change the concentrations of OCIand HOCI.
The Ideal pH Level
The ideal equilibrium distribution is
equal concentrations of HOCI and
OCI-. The table shows that a pH of 7.5
maintains this balance. If the pH is
held in the range from 7.2 to 7.8, a
suitable distribution of HOCI and OCIis provided. If the pH is lower than 7.2,
the high concentration of HOCI is very
irritating to the eyes of swimmers.
Also, the growth of algae flourishes in
this acid range. If the pH is higher than
7.8, too much of the disinfectant is
present as OCI-, which is decomposed
rapidly by sunlight.
The pH is adjusted by adding acid
or base to the pool water. If the pH is
too high (if the pool water is too basic),
hydrochloric (muriatic) acid, HCI, or sodium bisulfate, NaHS04 , can be
added to the water to react with this
excess base. If the pH is too low (if the
pool is too acidic), sodium carbonate,
Na2C03, added to the pool will react
with the excess acid and bring the pH
back up to an acceptable value.
Pool care involves both physical and
chemical treatments. Although the
tests used to determine the necessity
of chemical treatment do not require
an understanding of the chemistry involved, some knowledge of acid-base
chemistry, pH, and equilibrium concepts provides the pool owner with the
logic behind these chemical treatments. This knowledge also helps to
ensure the safety of all who use the
pool.
References
Linda, F. w.; Hollenbach, R.C. "The Backyard
Pool." Sciquest, 52(5):7-9, May/June 1979.
Faust, J. P; Gower, A.H. "Treatment of Swimming Pools." Kirk-Othmer Encylopedia of
Chemical Technology, Vol. 22, 2nd ed. N.V:
Wiley and Sons, 1970.
Faust, J. P; Waldvogel, R.L. The HTffF! Water
Book. Stamford, Connecticut: Olin Chemicals, 1976.
5